Difficulty of the science

1. There is no science more difficult than that on which we are
entering in these lectures. It is worth while to discuss the nature of
this difficulty. It is a question of interest rather than of intricacy.
All sciences have, perhaps, much the same possibilities of broad theory
and subtle analysis. But Logic stands alone in the difficulty with
which the student sustains his persuasion that its point of view is
worth applying.

In most other sciences, even in the philosophical sciences, there
is a continual stimulus to sense-perception, to curiosity, to human
interest. The learner is called upon to dissect animals or plants,
to undertake delicate manipulations with beautifully contrived
instruments, to acquaint himself with the history of nations, with
the genesis of worlds, with strange and novel speculations upon the
nature of space, or with the industry and well-being of various classes
among mankind at the present day. And these elements of novelty, these
stimulations of sense-perception or of practical interest, carry us
forward imperceptibly, and sustain our {2} eagerness to analyse and
combine in theoretic completeness the novel matter thus constantly
impinging upon us.

In Philosophy, and more especially in Logic, we can promise little
or nothing of this kind. The teacher of Philosophy, from Socrates
downwards, has talked about common things, things already familiar
to his hearers. And although he calls upon them to think of these
things in a peculiar way, and from an unaccustomed point of view, yet
it is likely to be felt that he is demanding a new effort, without
supplying a new interest. And it is a common experience, that after a
time the mind rebels against this artificial attitude, which fatigues
without instructing, if we have accustomed ourselves to understand by
instruction the accumulation of new sense-perceptions and the extension
of historical or scientific vision over a wider superficial area.

Now this I cannot help, and I will not disguise. In Philosophy, and
in Logic above all, it must be so. The whole point and meaning of the
study is that in it we re-traverse familiar ground, and survey it by
unfamiliar processes. We do not, except accidentally, so much as widen
our mental horizon. For those who care to understand, to trace the
connecting principles and functions that permeate our intellectual
world, there is indeed an interest of a peculiar kind. But even
experienced students will occasionally feel the strain of attending to
difficult distinctions, entirely without the excitement of novelty in
sense-perception or of a practical bearing upon human life. It is this
that makes Logic probably the hardest of all the sciences.

2. We cannot hope to vanquish this difficulty unless we face it boldly
from the first. There are in the old-fashioned Logic-books tricks and
puzzles, fallacies and repartees, which can in some degree be made
amusing; but of these I do not intend to speak. The course by which
alone I can hope honestly to awaken a true logical interest among
any who may be quite unfamiliar with the subject, is to approach the
matter descriptively, and try to set before you fully and fairly what
the problem is which the process of knowledge has to meet. And then
it may be possible to claim a genuine theoretical curiosity--none the
less genuine that it may be tinged with a sympathy for man’s common
birthright of intelligence--for the detailed explanation of the means
by which this problem is solved from day to day. Such an explanation is
the science of Logic.

The problem may be thus introduced. Several of those present have,
I believe, attended a previous course of lectures on Psychology.
They have learned, I presume, to think of the mind as the course of
consciousness, a continuous connected presentation, more or less
emphasising within it various images, and groups of images and ideas,
which may be roughly said to act and re-act upon each other, to cohere
in systems, and to give rise to the perception of self. This course
of consciousness, including certain latent elements, the existence
of which it is necessary to assume, is an individual mind, attached
to a particular body, and so far as we know, not separable from the
actions and affections of that body. What is the connection between
such a course of consciousness in any individual, and the world as
that individual knows and wills it? This is the point at {4} which
Psychology passes into Logic. Psychology treats of the course of ideas
and feelings; Logic of the mental construction of reality. How does the
course of my private ideas and feelings contain in it, for me, a world
of things and persons which are _not merely in my mind?


3. Schopenhauer called his great work, _The World as Will and
Idea_. [1] Leaving out Will for the moment, let us consider the world
“as Idea.”

  “‘The world is my idea;’ [2] this is a truth which holds
  good for everything that lives and knows, though man alone
  can bring it into reflective and abstract consciousness. If
  he really does this, he has attained to philosophical wisdom.
  It then becomes clear and certain to him that what he knows
  is not a sun and an earth, but only an eye that sees a sun,
  a hand that feels an earth; that the world which surrounds
  him is there only as an idea, _i.e._ only in relation to
  something else, the consciousness which is himself. If any
  truth can be asserted _a priori_, it is this; for it is the
  expression of the most general form of all possible and
  thinkable experience: a form which is more general than
  time, space, or causality, for they all pre-suppose it.

  .....

  “No truth, therefore, is more certain, more independent of
  all others, and less in need of proof than this, that all that
  exists for knowledge, and, therefore, this whole world, is
  only object in relation to subject, perception of a perceiver,
  in a word, idea. This is obviously true of the past and the
  future, as well as of the present, of what is farthest off, as
  of {5} what is near; for it is true of time and space
  themselves, in which alone these distinctions arise. All that
  in any way belongs or can belong to the world is inevitably
  thus conditioned through the subject and exists only for the
  subject. The world is idea.”

4. So much for “idea.” What do we mean by “world”? A succession of
images passing before us, or rather making up our consciousness, like a
dream, is not a world. The term is very expressive; it is a favourite
word in Shakespeare. When the courtier says —

  “Hereafter, in a better world than this,
  I shall desire more love and knowledge of you,”

he does not mean, as I used to think, “in heaven”; he means in a
better condition of social affairs. In “mad world, mad kings, mad
composition,” the term means more especially the set of political and
family connections within which extraordinary reversals of behaviour
have just taken place. Often we use the expression, with a qualifying
epithet, to indicate some particular sphere of connected action, “the
ecclesiastical world,” “the political world,” and so forth. Always
there seems to be implied the notion of a set of things or persons
bound together by some common quality which enables them to act upon
each other, and to constitute what is technically termed a “whole.”
_The_ “world” _par excellence_, then, ought to mean the one connected
set of things and persons which we all recognise {6} and refer to as
the same, and as including ourselves along with all who use the word in
the same sense.

Then the “world as idea” means no less than this, that the system of
things and persons which surrounds all of us, and which each of us
speaks of and refers to as the same for every one, exists for each of
us as something built up in his own mind--the mind attached to his own
body--and out of the material of his own mind.

5. Let us illustrate this building up by thinking of the world, our
surroundings, as an animal must be aware of it. The lowest beginnings
of sight, for example, give no colour and no shape. An animal in this
stage can, probably, only just take warning if a dark object comes
between him and the light. Therefore he cannot have the ordered visual
image of space definitely stretching away all round him, which is the
primary basis of our idea of a world. He can move, no doubt, but there
is nothing to make us suppose that he records and co-ordinates the
results of his movements into anything like that permanent order of
objects which must be constructed in some way by a human being even
though born blind. Succession, we might say, is much more powerful
with animals than co-existence; but we should have to guard ourselves
against supposing that this was what we mean by succession, that is,
a process definitely recognised as in time, with a connection of some
reasonable kind between its phases. For the most part with animals
out of sight is out of mind; if so, the present is not interpreted,
enlarged, and arranged with reference to what is not present in time
or space by them as it is by us. And therefore the consciousness of a
single system of things, {7} permanent, and distinct from the momentary
presentations of the senses, cannot, in all probability, grow up for
them. If so, they have no real world, but only a dream world, [1]
_i.e._ a world not contrasted with the stream of presentation, nor
taken as the common theatre of all actions and events. This difference
between the world of an animal and that of a human being, is a rough
measure of what man does by mental or intellectual construction in
making his world.
